(pleasant music)
- [Narrator] We are the paradoxical ape.
Bipedal, naked, large-brained.
Long the master of fire,
tools, and language
but still trying to understand ourselves.
Aware that death is inevitable
yet filled with optimism.
We grow up slowly.
We hand down knowledge.
We empathize and deceive.
We shape the future from our
shared understanding of the past.
Carta brings together experts
from diverse disciplines
to exchange insights on who we are
and how we got here.
An exploration made possible
by the generosity of humans like you.
- So I'd like to tell you
a bit about the young man
who I've worked with now for
32 years I think, Derek Paravicini.
Here's a picture of Derek
at 26 weeks when he was born
weighing a little over 700
grams, about 1 1/2 pounds.
So Derek could literally fit
on the palm of an adult's hand.
And he had a fierce fight for survival.
This was 38 years ago,
so you know the kind of
therapeutic treatments
for very premature infants
were still quite primitive.
For example, there's no way of measuring
Derek's oxygen saturation
levels consistently.
So to measure oxygen they
had to take a tiny drop
of the blood from his finger,
rush off to the machine to measure it
that took half an hour by which time
of course the oxygen had fluctuated again.
So little surprise really that Derek
developed retinopathy of prematurity,
which is when the blood vessels
at the back of the eye
force the retina forward.
And his early development
was also very delayed.
He was later diagnosed with
severe learning difficulties
with the verbal IQ of about 57 and autism.
As a child his speech
was largely echolalic
so he rather than sort of speak
with semantic understanding
he tended to repeat back
whatever was said to him.
But the very good news
was he was brought up
by a traditional British nanny
and she was determined that
Derek was going to make
the best of his life,
whatever that was going to be
and she went up into the attic one day
despairing of finding
something to entertain Derek
and she found this old
toy really, toy keyboard
which she plugged in and gave to him.
And not thinking anything of it,
in fact Derek just seemed
to bash this thing for ages
and then suddenly they realized that
in fact he wasn't bashing randomly.
He'd actually taught himself
to play chords and then tunes
just through a process of self discovery.
I met up with Derek when
he was four years old,
and he'd already built up a
large repertoire of pieces.
Now he'd had no tuition, of
course he had no visual model
to guide him 'cause
Derek was totally blind.
He had very small hands,
he was only four years old
and as a consequence he got
a very eccentric technique,
as you can see from the pictures.
So there was lots of karate chops
and fists and knuckles and
even the occasional nose
went down to pick out
notes he couldn't hear.
By great good fortune that same nanny
who was responsible for Derek's upbringing
pressed the button on a
tape recorder just briefly
and so we've got a little
fragment of what it was like
to hear Derek's playing
when he was four years old.
Here's a little bit,
see if you recognize it.
(playing "Ave Maria")
Any offers?
- Ave Maria.
- Yes so good on Derek, it is a miracle.
Here's a boy who understood
virtually nothing
about the world around him.
Really no useful language,
and yet without any
encouragement to start with,
he taught himself to play the piano.
One of the great human accomplishments.
I think the important thing about that
early recording though it
shows such a lot about the way
that Derek's musical mind was working.
For a start he wasn't
just copying what he heard
because the recording he
heard was a voice and pianist,
so he had to rearrange that duet
for a single instrument of course.
Also because he had such small hands
he had to change the spacing of the chords
in order to be able to play them,
and so the result really to me provides
evidence of genuine musical intelligence
and indeed the beginnings of creativity.
We've heard that savants
are more than just mimics
and I think Derek even
in that very early stage
shows a genuinely creative
musical mind at work.
Just to show you a bit about Derek today,
he's now age 38.
I think he's been to
California about six times now,
so he's very cross he's not
here today I can tell you
because although he doesn't
enjoy 12 hours on a plane,
he does enjoy making music when he lands.
But he now has his own jazz quartet
and I think music for him is so much more
than just a technical exercise.
It's genuinely a social and
emotionally fulfilling activity.
It's incredibly important for
his identity and self-esteem.
If you ask Derek what he
does he says I'm a pianist.
It's important for friendship,
for shared feelings, and even for humor.
So here's Derek playing today.
If I asked you to guess
the piece initially,
you might be wrong so there's a warning.
This is Derek being witty.
(classical piano music)
♫ Night and day you are the one
♫ Only you beneath the
moon and under the sun
- Now from later on the track.
♫ Night and day
(jazz piano music)
- So you can see how Derek's evolved,
hopefully in the intervening 32 years.
So what kickstarted
Derek's musical learning
and how is it he can do what he does?
And indeed with Leslie Lemke as well.
And it's the same unusual
skills all musical savants
and indeed all musical prodigies rely on
which is universal absolute pitch.
Now absolute pitch is
the ability to reproduce
and to recognize pitches
not only in music,
but in any, any environmental sound.
And it starts very early.
It's generally in place by 24 months.
It's interesting seeing
that young Indian drummer.
I've certainly seen young
blind children age 12 once
start to play the piano.
By 18 months absolute pitch is in place
and they're playing
pieces in the right key.
So if these abilities are going to start,
they're going to start very early.
So absolute pitch is very rare
in western populations as a whole.
About .01%.
Doing a kind of meta analysis
of all the literature
I can find plus all the blind
children I've worked with
which is hundreds over the years,
something like 45% of
those who are born blind
or who lose their sight early on,
they're ones who develop absolute pitch.
Among partially sighted
children it's around 11%,
and around those on the
autism spectrum around 8%
so you can see there's
something massively different
going on with a fair
proportion of these children.
It's interesting is about whether it's
genetic or environmental
is something one can debate
because there's nothing genetic
about Derek's musicality.
I think it's the fact he was born blind
that made the structural differences
the way his brain developed.
In fact actually I
think it's largely to do
with his exceptional early
cognitive environments
that blindness or visual
impairment and autism create.
Presumably there must be
a genetic component too
because not all blind children develop AP.
What it is, it's a focus on absolute
perceptual qualities of
things for their own sake
that seems to make the difference.
So I'll play you, one
wonderful thing about Derek is
he loves psychological experiments.
He never gets bored, and I do there's
one particular experiment I'm
going to play you a bit of it
where I play him 120 different chords
which would drive anyone crazy,
and ask him to play them back.
Most people freak out after
about 20 of these things,
and after the end of a hard
day's of taking data from Derek
he'd say can we do the
chords again tomorrow?
I said wha, Derek, right.
So here's a sample of those 120 chords.
If there's someone with
absolute pitch in the audience,
you might be able to pick out the notes
but this is the only information Derek got
and I guess most people
wouldn't be able to tell you
how many notes are in each chord,
let alone what notes are being played.
Here's a sample of them.
(chords playing)
You know how many notes
were in the last one?
I wouldn't have a clue,
there were nine in fact.
(chords playing)
Here's the chords
and here's Derek's responses.
This is me, this is Derek.
This is me and Derek.
We're on the second line.
(chords playing)
In fact what Derek does
is you might pick up,
he actually adds notes in typically.
He very rarely misses them out.
So here are Derek's stats
from the 120 chords.
There's four, five, six,
seven, eight, and nine notes.
You can see he got all the
four note chords absolutely right.
He got about 96% of the five notes
and so on down to about
93% of the nine notes.
In fact, it was interesting
seeing the bit from 60 Minutes
'cause Lesley Stahl interviewed
Derek at some length
and got him to play 10 note chords
and he was still about 92%
which is amazing when you think
the sheer mental programming
to get 10 fingers over the right notes
at the right time is extraordinary.
Oh it's again interestingly
it's not this sort of
myth of savants as kind
of superhuman beings
that just don't conform to the rules
that the rest of us play by.
For example Derek did much
better with tonal chords
than what you might call non-tonal.
In other words, standard western tonality
Derek was better at.
He was also more successful
from the bottom of the chords up,
so in other words he was
listening more structurally.
Most of us only listen, we
tend to hear the melody line.
Skillful musicians tend to
hear from the baseline up
because that's telling them the structure.
So in other words Derek was listening
with musical intelligence.
He wasn't just a perceptual machine
that could copy, and in fact if we look
at how Derek did compared to other savants
and with expert what you might call
neurotypical musicians
with absolute pitch,
you can see in fact there is
a fairly continuous distribution.
Derek's at the top, the
top blue line with S.
Yellow savants are in solid lines
and then the neurotypical
musicians with absolute pitch
are on the dotted lines and I'm quite sure
if I found enough subjects there'd be
quite a continuous distribution.
So in other words the savants
are using the same strategies
as the skillful trained musicians.
So as I said, it suggests
that these people
exist on a continuum and
that both use the same
structurally based listening strategies.
Right, another study now.
A long term memory is a feature
of all musical savants as Darryl said.
And sometimes this is said to be
eidetic or photographic memory.
This is absolutely, this is in fact true.
Right, here's another mean
test that people think
you must be mad doing this.
So I composed a special new
piece of music for Derek to learn.
You'd have to compose something
'cause if he's heard it
then he's probably already remembered it.
And all he did was to
hear it and play it back.
So imagine that you're
sitting down at the piano,
you haven't got the music in front of you,
and you hear this.
(jaunty piano music)
(applause)
So how much do you reckon
you'd be able to play?
Well, I'll show you what
Derek did in a minute.
Just to say this was
quite a long term study.
Over four years we did 26 sessions
with increasingly long breaks between.
Two days in the first case
and two years in the last one.
And each session after the
first Derek tried to play
whatever he'd remember.
He then listened to Chromatic Blues again,
attempt to play once more and then
listened once more to Chromatic Blues.
So his very first attempt, he just heard
exactly what you've heard
and in fact he got about 30% of it right.
Here was his.
(jaunty piano music)
Not bad, Derek.
Of course this shows
one of the real dangers
I think of a lot of savant studies
is that unless you do a
pretty systematic analysis
it's terribly hard to know.
In other words, if I just
played that piece in a concert.
This so often happens.
People play Derek something
in a live situation.
He then plays it back, and
of course no one even knows
if he's got it exactly right or not
because we haven't got Derek's ear.
So I think a lot of
savant myths are built on
slightly dubious anecdotes shall we say?
So what did Derek do,
what was going on there?
Well, it was evidently beyond
the capacity of his working memory,
but he couldn't help but produce
something that made musical sense.
In other words, he's using
music like a natural language
in the same way if we record a story,
we don't get every note right
but we get the overall structure right
and we get the meaning right,
and that's what Derek did.
He got the feel of the music right,
he got the overall structure right
and he got some of the detail right,
but it wasn't completely right.
So yet again we see creativity coming in.
Derek had to be musically creative
in order to make ends meet.
So what did he do?
Well he used the musical
fragments in a different order.
In order to make them fit
he had to transform them
in real time and he
introduced stock phrases
from sort of the rhythm and blues style
from Count Basie, from the
blues turnaround and so on.
So in other words Derek's
functioning exactly like
a skilled jazz musician is
functioning in that context.
So in fact it's anything but this
kind of photographic memory.
It's a characteristic
of neurotypical recall.
In fact here's a comparison
with Sacha who is an expert
neurotypical jazz pianist
with absolute pitch
whom we gave the same test to.
And you can see Derek outperforms him
after the initial burst, but
essentially Sacha's doing
you know not badly at all.
Much better than most of us could do.
And analysis shows he was using
very similar strategies to Derek.
You can see that Sacha
gave up before Derek.
Derek carried on for another two years.
In fact occasionally now he'll
say can I do Chromatic Blues?
And I'll say no, don't, no.
Right, last of all.
Very often I get asked, Derek gets asked,
what about modern music?
This problem of atonal music
as it's sometimes called.
Now atonal music was
introduced by Schoenberg
amongst others in the beginning
of the first half of the
20th Century I suppose.
And it consciously avoids
traditional musical
grammar, syntax, and rules.
And most listeners report
finding atonal music discordant.
In other words it sounds
like there are mistakes in it
and it's very difficult to remember.
Schoenberg said all he
wanted was for people
to whistle his tunes in the
street but never got it.
In fact Tchaikovsky
annoyed him particularly
because people would
whistle Tchaikovsky's tunes.
(audience laughs)
So how did Derek get on?
Well I gave him a bit of Schoenberg's
first atonal masterpieces
called to try to play.
So again if you close your eyes
and just pretend to be
Derek, this is what he heard.
(atonal piano music)
How did he get on?
How do you think he did?
Well here's a young man who can hit
nine note chords with 93% accuracy.
Absolutely, he couldn't do it.
He completely couldn't do it.
Here's the original first phrase.
(atonal piano music)
Here's Derek.
(different atonal piano music)
So you can see, even his absolute pitch,
his flawless absolute pitch was confused
when there's a lack of
background syntax and rules.
Which I found quite extraordinary.
In fact I had to check the equipment.
I thought Derek you got
the first note wrong.
I've never heard him
make a mistake like that.
So in other words, the atonal,
the music without rules
even confused Derek's perception.
Time to play you a little bit
of what happened a week later.
I asked him to play it a week later
and the result he'd stepped
back from Schoenberg
into the world of Wagner,
it was extraordinary.
Here's a little bit of it.
(piano music)
So in other words Derek had
corrected the wrong notes.
(audience laughs)
So in conclusion Derek and other savants.
I've worked, great pleasure have
worked with about six prodigious savants.
Have an unusual degree of expertise
but his engagement appears to be
qualitatively similar to
neurotypical musicians
with absolute pitch.
In other words it seems
to be a matter of degree
rather than a fundamental difference.
And I'd like to think that perhaps
we're gaining more insights
about neurotypicality
by looking as it were
the opposite way right?
We tend to view savants from
the view of neurotypical
of sort of mean based psychological tests
whereas in fact if we look
at the world of savants
and see what lights can
they show on all of us
we might be in a stronger
position in some ways.
And ultimately I think we're all part
of the same continuum of human
neurodiversity, thank you.
(applause)
(pleasant music)